% toki pona page 3 - verbs and objects
% /dev/urandom
% 2020-03-15

The vocabulary for this page:

| word  | meaning                          |
|-------|----------------------------------|
| e     | (specifies an object)            |
| ijo   | thing, object                    |
| ilo   | tool, machine, device            |
| lipu  | book, document, paper            |
| lukin | eye, to look, to see, to seek to |
| olin  | love, compassion, affection      |
| pali  | to do, to work, to make, labor   |
| pana  | to give, to send, to emit        |
| telo  | water, fluid, to water, to clean |
| tomo  | home, room, structure            |

To add a verb to the sentence, use the following structure:

> [noun] li [verb]

For example,

> mije li pali. - A man is working. / A man works.

Both the noun and the verb can have adjectives added after it. If added after a
verb, the adjective functions as an adverb.

> jan wawa li pali pona. - A strong person is working well.

> %warning%
> There is no way to determine whether a word in such a sentence is an
> adjective or a verb. For example, the phrase "mi moku" can mean either "I am
> eating" or "I am food".


> %info%
> Verbs don't have any tense information in them. A way to specify time will be
> explained in a later page.

To add an object -- the thing that the verb applies to -- use the particle "e"
for a following structure:

> [subject] li [verb] e [object]

> jan wawa li pali e tomo. - A strong person is (building/working on) a house.

Objects can also have adjectives added to them.

> jan pali li pana e moku pona. - A worker gives out good food.

To *show* something to someone, combine `pana` with the preposition `tawa lukin` (toward
the seeing of):

> jan Ton li pana e ijo tawa lukin sina. -- Tom shows you something.
>
> o pana e lipu tawa lukin mi. -- Show me the book.

Toki pona has no passive voice. To translate a passive English sentence, make the
agent the subject. For an unknown agent, use "jan" (someone/people):

> "Steve was loved by all" → jan ale li olin e jan Siwe.
>
> "The house was built" → jan li pali e tomo. (someone built the house)

Here are some sentences:

> jan pona mi li pona e ilo lukin. - My friend is (improving/fixing) a looking
> instrument (glasses, binoculars, microscope, etc.).

> mi telo e moku. - I clean the food.

> mi olin e meli mi. - I love my wife.

> %warning%
>
> The word "lukin" describes the act of seeing, not visual appearance.
> To say something *looks* a certain way (appearance as a property), place "lukin" after
> the adjective:
>
> > sina pona lukin. -- You look good. (your appearance is good)
> >
> > tomo ni li suli lukin. -- This building looks big.
>
> This is different from "lukin la", which introduces an uncertain or reported observation
> about the whole following sentence:
>
> > lukin la jan Ton li wile tawa. -- It seems Tom wants to go. (based on what I see)
>
> Rule of thumb: *[adj] lukin* = visual property of a thing. *lukin la [sentence]* = "apparently…".
 
## Exercises

Now, try to figure out the meaning of these sentences.

* jan lili li pana e telo lukin.
* ona li lukin e lipu.
* soweli ike li utala e meli.
* jan utala li moku e kili suli.
* soweli lili li moku e telo.
* mi telo e ijo suli.

And try to translate the following sentences into toki pona.

* She loves every person.
* The bathroom ("house of water") is good.
* I hand out documents.
* An evil warrior is looking at your house.
* My tools are working well.

[Answers](en/answers#p3)

> %page-nav%
> [Previous page](en/2)
> [Top page](.)
> [Next page](en/4)
